All right, so, let's follow this train
of thought to it's logical conclusion.
All right, so
our goal here is fixed expected return,
minimize risk, or fix risk and
maximize expected return, okay.
So before we get into this, we kind of
have to define our term, okay so when I
say expected return, remember, expected
return, it's a mathematical concept.
It's a probability weighted average,
right, if there's a half chance
of return of 3% chance and
half of return 5% then
the expected return is 4%.
Even though of course, we know 4% isn't
going to happen, it's going to be 3 or 5,
but expect return is 4, so
that's what I mean by expected return.
The mathematical concept of
a probability witted average, okay.
For risk, there's different
ways you can measure risk,
the way that Harry Markowitz
measured it and
the way that people continue
to measure it to today, for
the most part, is with the mathematical
concept of variance, okay?
Variance is a term of
art to a statistician,
variance is the expected squared deviation
of the outcome from its expectation, okay?
So the variance, in our little example
there, right, it was three or five,
so that variance would be defined
by three or five relative to four.
If we had instead two or six,
all right, two or six, well,
same expectation, larger variance, right?
So it's the expected squared deviation
from that expected return, okay, so
that is a standard measurement of risk.
I don't want to go deep into the math
here, you can sort of look it up on your
own if you're curious, but
that's what variance is.
And then, the other term you'll
often hear is not the variance, but
the standard deviation, okay?
And the standard deviation, well,
that turns out to be just the square
root of the variance, okay?
So, talking about variance,
standard deviation,
you're talking about
the same basic concept.
It's just that the standard deviation is
the square root of the variance, okay?
So, bear in mind when I'm talking
about risk and expected return,
that's what I'll be talking about.
Risk is variance,
expected return is this probability
weighted average of the possible outcomes,
okay?
So for a given expected return, we're
going to want to minimize variance and
for a given variance we're
going to maximize expected return.
That's why people refer to this
whole sort of body of work on
this topic as mean variance optimization,
mean variance optimization, okay.
And the key terminology in this area
is an efficient portfolio, okay?
We're looking for efficient portfolios,
and when someone says efficient portfolio,
that means also something very specific,
it means what we've been saying, okay.
Efficient portfolio is
a portfolio with that
nice property that of all
portfolios with the same
expected return it has least variants,
okay.
So it's the most appealing from this
point of view of all portfolios with that
expected return, or
of course the other way around, right.
For all portfolios with it's variants it
has the highest expected return, okay?
So that's an efficient portfolio,
and you can see why people
call it an efficient portfolio, because
you're efficiently bearing risk, right?
You're bearing the risk that you just
absolutely has to be born if you
want that expected return, all right?
So that's an efficient portfolio,
by the way,
let me just because we could get confused
at this point, so I want to be clear.
There are two ways that the idea of
efficiency shows up all the time
in financial economics and
they're not the same idea.
So you have efficient portfolios,
okay, which is what I just said,
you also have the concept of
an efficient market which I'm sure
you've heard about over the years,
right our markets efficient.
And when people say our markets efficient,
what they're saying is,
do markets reflect available information?
Okay, so another way,
is it possible to beat
the market by trading on
available information?
If it is, then you would say markets
are not efficient, all right,
that there's information out there and
that yeah you could use to beat
the market so they're not efficient.
That's a different idea, okay, that's
not something that we're going to be
worrying about here in this module,
the concept of market efficiency.
This is an important concept, but
what we care about here
is portfolio efficiency,
that is the brass ring
of the robo advisor.
Okay, so what Dr.
Markowitz accomplished back in the 50s,
and what people have
built on over the years,
is he laid out how mathematically,
you can identify these
efficient portfolios.
Okay, now I'm not going to walk
through all the math here,
that's sort of beyond the scope,
the actual details of the math
would take us a week right?
And we don't really have that kind of
time, so let me just tell you what
the inputs are here to this, the inputs
that you need in order to accomplish this.
And if you're curious about the actual
sort of what's the algorithm,
then you can certainly go look that up,
it's everywhere on the Internet.
But so let's just talk about the inputs
here, the inputs you're going to need
to put into your sort of optimizer that's
going to run Dr. Markowitz's algorithm.
Are going to be number one,
the expected returns of all
of the individual assets
that you are optimizing
over all the things that
might go into your portfolio.
You need the expected return of all
those things that you might have in
your portfolio.
Okay, and then on top of that,
for the risk part,
you're going to need the variants,
remember the same idea.
The variants of each one of those assets,
and also and
this is absolutely crucial to the whole
thing, what they call the co-variances.
The co-variances are how much
these assets move with each other.
Okay, how much they move with each
other and if you think about it, that
is going to be crucial to risk reduction
through buying a lot of assets, right?
If I have two assets and
they move opposite to each other, okay,
then I'd rather have both of them at
once than just one of them, right?
Because their risks are going to
cancel each other out somewhat.
And even if they don't move
opposite to each other,
as long as they don't move together,
holding a lot of them at once.
Generally, those those individual
movements of the individual
assets are going to have a tendency to
wash out, to wash out on average, okay?
So those covariance,
the co-movements between the assets
are going to be a crucial
input into this algorithm.
So you have expected returns, and
then the variances of the assets,
and also these co-variances that
tell you about how much these things
are going to move with each other.
Okay, so
as they say the actual math is a slog, but
coming out of the other side of this
math is going to be a portfolio with
a lot less risk than the individual
components that went into it.
And it's one of those things that maybe
it's obvious once you think about it,
but, wouldn't we all want to write
one of those papers have some result
that no one had thought of and
then it's obvious once you think about it.
That was an amazing accomplishment of Dr.
Markowitz, and it is everywhere
in the world that he surveys now.
So, if you think about
applying this concept
of mean variance optimization, Dr.
Markowitz's algorithm in your app.
Let me just say there's a there's
sort of a hard way and easy way,
I'll talk about the hard way,
the sketch right now, the hard way and
then in our next lecture I'll
talk about the easy way, okay.
So, the hard way is that
you take a stand on what
the expected returns are of
all of the different
assets you're putting
into your black box here.
What the expected returns are and
all those variances and co-variances and
you run the program, and
you calculate these efficient portfolios.
But of course, I'm saying it's hard
not because it's hard to do the math,
I'm saying it's hard because
what you get out of that
optimization is only as accurate
as what you put into it, right?
If you really don't know what
the expected returns are of
the different assets that you
were putting into your black box.
Then you're just totally guessing,
then what the output is only going to
be as good as your guess is.
Okay, and that can be the tough part,
right, you think about well,
what might go into this portfolio?
Well, maybe shares of Facebook,
maybe shares of Apple,
maybe shares of Walmart, or Ford, or
maybe an IPO that just happened yesterday.
Maybe stocks from other countries,
other sorts of assets, gold futures,
oil futures all sorts of things could
go in to this optimization, right?
And that can be tough to say what
was the expected return of Facebook
versus the expected return of Apple,
versus the expected return of Ford?
All right, that's not so easy, okay,
generally speaking it's going to be
a lot easier for
you to say something intelligent about,
not those expected returns,
but those co-movements, right.
That's something that
you actually can say,
you can think about with
a lot more accuracy.
I can kind of understand how Facebook
moves with Apple or with Google.
I can understand how Facebook might not
move so tightly with Walmart or with Ford.
And I can go to the data,
I can measure those co-movements
with a lot of accuracy, okay?
So, When I go into this optimization,
it's a little hard to say much
about the expected returns,
it's a lot easier to say
things about this co-movement.
So you might take an approach to say look,
okay,
I don't want to put a bunch of
guesswork into this optimization.
So I'm going to say look,
let's just say for argument's sake,
expected returns are all the same,
but the co-movements.
Those are the things that I'm going
to estimate from the data and
put in the optimization and that is
going to give me my optimal portfolio.
So what I'm saying here is that,
as as a theoretical construct Dr.
Markowitz's algorithm is very
helpful when you get close to it,
you have to start making
some judgment calls.
And sometimes for some practitioners,
the easiest judgment calls is to say look,
I'm not going to make sort of wild guesses
about expect returns of different stocks.
But I do have lots of information
to use about their co-movements,
and that's going to be
the workhorse of the investment
advice I'm giving my clients, okay?
So that's one of the hard way,
and then in the next lecture,
we'll talk about he easier way.